# POP MUSIC
Pop music is difficult to define. The content of its definition has shifted throughout the course of time. What started as a network of white songwriters manufacturing premade songs for crooners and groups (Tin Pan Alley), became an individual crusade (singer/songwriter) and eventually a herald for integration and emancipation, where blacks as artists and teens as audience were given recognition and a platform.

From the sixties until the eighties, Rock forms the basis for Pop, but that foundation shifts towards House in the nineties and R&B/Rap in the nillies. Lately (from 2010 onwards), Pop has become too eclectic to identify another super-genre within as the dominant core. Whatever that core may be, Pop is always a lighter, more accessible variant with catchy, pronounced melodies, but not too complex. Pop songs are always 100% radio friendly, i.e. they are edited to play up to four minutes or less and have politically correct lyrics, often bordering on shallowness. Pop has plain song structures, which are easy to memorize and so are the chords or melodies. A strong focus on video clips and visual performance have become staples in the Pop industry throughout the years, as most Pop does try to sell. More than any other super-genre, Pop has a commercial nature, or – in better terms – Pop transmutes in what sells the most.

The word “Pop” is short for popular music and first coined in the fifties. Crooners from that decade were the first to be mentioned as “pop”. These artists had a tremendous popular appeal and their songwriters would seek inspiration from the most diverse genres in order to attain the perfect success formula. This means that at first Pop was not seen as a separate genre, but a collection of music from different genres that are the most popular. This is of course a matter of perspective. But although Pop may be vague as a group, especially in the beginning, its various subsequent subgenres are often well-defined. Therefore Pop is rightfully a super-genre on its own. Sometimes Pop is being used as a term for all popular music, but this is highly confusing and will not be used in musicmap.

The strength of Pop music lies in a denial of genre or niche: Pop does not try to bring a new subculture or convey a message. It wants to include anyone and everyone and just have fun. Pop wants to be approachable: no barrier, no threshold, no shame. Anything goes. But Pop should not be seen as a derogatory term: every person adores at least one Pop song, whether it’s Britpop, Synthpop, Disco Pop or whatnot. Pop after all, is not irreconcilable with innovation or quality. But what exactly defines Pop music then? Pop is whatever gets the most appeal from people, the common denominator between different music tastes and the most flexible, applicable of styles. Never too extreme in one aspect or another, yet never too mundane or boring; Pop seeks to catch the attention fast and hold it, but never in an offensive or disturbing way.

In the US, the repressive authority of the Bush administration on Dance/EDM parties in general has led since its inauguration in 2000 of a stronger intertwining of Dance, especially House, with other genres such as Rap, Nu R&B and Pop music. Electronic samples and the use of soulful vocals start to appear on EDM records that would otherwise be ignored. American EDM artists were forced to cross over to Pop in order to financially survive and this has led to an even greater diversity, complexity, and eclecticism in contemporary (Pop) music. After the Obama inauguration, “pure” EDM breaks through in the States, something that hasn’t happened since its birth in Chicago and Detroit. However, by that time, Pop, Dance, Rap, R&B, and Rock were already so clotted up (not the least by the advent of streaming music services and growing multimedia) that it might even be reasonable to discard Pop as a separate super-genre and regard it as simply a collection of the most popular and commercial music – just like it was in the beginning.

 
## Sub-Genres

### SKIFFLE(REVIVAL)
1949
ROCK 'N' ROLLPOP
Skiffle is one of the oldest popular music genres. Emerging in the twenties in the United States, early Skiffle can be seen as a Folk influenced form of Proto-Country; just like Ragtime can be seen as Proto-Jazz and Gospel as Proto R&B. Skiffle was music for the poorest of people, who created a true jack-of-all-trades musical melting pot with whatever instrument they could lay their hands on, as long as it was cheap: fiddle, banjo, kanzoo, and household items such as washboards. The biggest challenge was an inexpensive alternative for bass, which they found in large jugs. Jug Bands (actually a synonym for early Skiffle) even had to throw pop-up homeparties to pay the rent and their instruments, which were called “Skiffles”.

From 1949 until 1958 a Skiffle Revival takes place in the United Kingdom, parallel to the rise of early Rhythm ‘n’ Blues and Rock ‘n’ Roll. Because Britain lacked the history of Country music, almost all musicians struggled with creating Rock ‘n’ Roll music, as they had no access to a quintessential ingredient. In response to American R’n’R, poor British students responded with a type of Folk-Blues-Rock, that was very loud, fast and noisy. They used the same instruments as older American Jug Bands alongside cheap acoustic guitars. But by 1958, Rock ‘n’ Roll became so big, that Skiffle quickly decayed.

### SCHLAGER
1950
POP
An enormous genre often forgotten in music genealogies is “Schlager”. The word is also synonymous with the type of song (“a Schlager”) and is German for hit song (to hit = schlagen). But the genre has a much greater reach than simply Germany and Austria. Neighboring countries Netherlands and Belgium, as well as former Yugoslavian countries and Sweden and Finland all have rich traditions of Schlager music. Its roots lie deep in traditional Folk music (particularly town criers and troubadours) but the style evolved into a more popular form of music starting as early as the thirties in some countries. Like troubadour songs, Schlagers are emotional, sentimental ballads, though often superficial in nature. They tell tales about love, misfortune or happiness, but always in a conservative and politically correct manner. After World War II and especially the Rock ‘n’ Roll revolution, Schlager singers went on the defense, as they felt threatened by this new type of popular music. Since Blues, Jazz and Country had little influence in prewar Europe, the rise of Rock ‘n’ Roll was even a greater shock and of more significance there. Thus a much greater production of Schlagers saw the light, produced in a lightweight pop manner with piano, guitar, accordion or folk instruments. Each country has its own history and differences when it comes to Schlager, but the common thread outlined here stretches outside borders. Schlager remains an undying genre, alive in many “folky” bars, community centers, or at huge Schlagerfestivals.

### BRILL BUILDING POP & CROONERS
1957
POP
Pop music is a commercial and light variant of either Rock or R&B music, often crossing over to whatever genre sells the most. However, before Rock music, producers were already creating Pop music. The dominant source of Pop in the early 20th century was Tin Pan Alley: a musical neighborhood in New York near and for Broadway (thus aimed at musicals). Nearby was the famous Brill Building. When EP’s became more and more commonplace in the fifties and the first hit parade appeared (in 1952), this building turned into a giant busy hive, filled with countless recording studios. At first, Brill Building’s focus lay at creating music for the family, but that all changed in the late fifties. As a response to Rock ‘n’ Roll’s popularity, professional Pop producers crafted teen oriented hit songs. Charming male crooners in the fifties and hired girl groups in the sixties were meant to express an irresistible image of sexiness, turning their work into large profits. The first crooners appeared in the twenties and were named after their singing technique of gently moaning in the microphone. A large difference with (poorer) hollers or shouters in Blues who had to use all the volume their voices could produce, as they had no voice amplification. Brill Building Pop evolved from a more minimal singer/songwriter type of music (early Tin Pan Alley pop music) into a light version of Rock ‘n’ Roll written in 6/8 signature with Latin or exotic sounds, strings, children’s melodies and Rhythm ‘n’ Blues influences. The most famous producer of this era is undoubtedly Phil Spector, who helped reach many Girl Groups and Golden Age Rock bands achieve stardom with his “Wall of Sound” recording technique.

### BUBBLEGUM & TEENYBOP
1966
POP
The sixties was a glorious decade of prosperity and happiness, but also of new inventions and gadgets for the whole family ushering the age of consumerism. A lot of babyboomer teenage children (or even preteens) were a perfect target for a new music genre, fittingly called Bubblegum (Pop). Music producers (acting like franchise CEO’s) took Rock ‘n’ Roll and stripped it down to simple, melodic Pop music that was premanufactured, commercialized, bought and sold. Bubblegum often featured ‘fun’, colorful instruments such as Hammond Organs.

Teenybop was pop music specifically made for very young or sensitive teens, which dealt about melodramatic and sentimental events (such as the first high school crush etc.). It’s clear that Teenybop shares a great deal of resemblance with Bubblegum: music as shiny merchandise or therapeutical triage for children. Bubblegum became an umbrella term for any studio based catchy tune under three minutes, and eventually used as a negative synonym for shallowness and lightheartedness, despite a number of independent Garage Rock and Rockabilly Pop bands creating similar music.

### COUNTRY POP & COUNTRY ROCK
1968
COUNTRYPOP
At the end of the nineties, Rock crosses over into two different directions: harder Blues Rock/Metal versus Country. What started as typical Folk Rock of the sixties, gradually got mixed up with Country and becomes Country Rock. This explains a great deal of overlapping between both genres. But via Folk Rock, Country Rock also reaches back to the fifties; to the pre-Merseybeat period. And this is its cardinal feature: Country Rock is specifically made for those who grew up with Rock ‘n’ Roll, but felt little connection with British or experimental Rock of the sixties. Most well-known artists have a pure Country background and are more interested in using the popularity of Rock to their advantage than the other way around. Strummed acoustic guitars (often 12-string), subtle drums and polyphonic vocals help combine the rebellious spirit of Rock ‘n’ Roll with the customs and arrangements of Country. Eventually Country Rock shakes off its rough feathers to breed Country Pop, though these genres are marginally different.

A lesser used term associated with Country Rock, is West Coast Rock: a loose affiliation of California based Country/Folk/Rock artists of the sixties and seventies. Another term, used as a radio format category, is “Middle of the Road” or MOR., because the music is a middle ground between Rock and Country. Although many MOR radio stations preferred all kinds of Country Pop & Rock, in strict terms it refers only to music before the age of Rock ‘n’ Roll.

### SINGER/SONGWRITER
1971
POP
Starting in 1967, Folk Rock slowly breaks loose from its predefined constraints and gives birth to perhaps the most immortal of music genres: Singer/Songwriter (S/SW). This marks a pivotal moment in music history: the artist in Pop music is no longer simply the performer of prewritten lines, but the author of them as well. By 1971 (not by chance at the start of the decade of individualism), the genre has fully taken form. Personal stories and emotions take precedence over social criticism and community feeling. Folk Rock provided wavering crooners with the confidence they needed to pursue solo careers and attain artistic independence. The essence of Singer/Songwriter lies in its lyrics: a revelation of inner thoughts in a poetic manner, often as exposing as possible. The accompaniment of these lyrics is also performed by the Singer/Songwriter, almost always with a single guitar or piano. During the early eighties, Singer/Songwriter leads with a series of alternative subgenres to Indie Pop & Rock, such as College Pop, Lo-Fi Pop, Neo-Folk and later Slowcore. Other subgenres are either dependent on the type of song (function) or the region (sentimental ballads, reactionary protest songs, Dutch Kleinkunst, smooth poplike Bleakfolk, Soft Rock as proto S/SW…) In France, the most important subgenre known as Chanson (“Song”) already experienced a rich history during the entire 20th century. Chansons are even more emotional than usual and have a strong historical connection with French film, literature, and theater.

### (EARLY) POP ROCK & POWER POP
1973
POP
Power Pop, one of the first true Pop Rock genres, is in fact a revival of Mersey Beat, a second British Invasion so to speak. However, you can hear an important difference: the riffs are played with short, energetic strokes, enhanced by fast, repetitive drum beats. This property gives Power Pop a very ‘spikey’ and hyperactive feel, hence its name. The emergence of Power Pop and the early types of Pop Rock that went along with it, must be seen as compensation for the ‘darker’, more serious types of Rock (Pub Rock, Roots Rock, Mod) popping up in the UK in the early seventies. To steer the people (read: teens) as far away from these ‘bad’ types of Rock as possible, the sound of Power Pop went in the opposite direction: happy, melodic and light. At the end of the seventies, Power Pop experienced a second wave, and in the nineties a third one. The success of Disco and derivatives trumped Pop Rock’s second wave and strongly suppressed the genre in the eighties. The original fusion of Hard Rock and Mersey Beat (first wave) became tainted by other genres during these succeeding waves, leading eventually to dissolution into other genres, though a number of Power Pop artists are still active. Original Power Pop served as a blueprint for many later Pop Rock artists, which were drawn to the bare simplicity of Classic Rock without psychedelic influences or extensive post-production.

### SOFT ROCK / ADULT CONTEMPORARY (A.C.)
1977
POP
Some A.O.R. bands took a lighter approach (no guitar solos and less bass) and created Soft Rock (though sometimes the two genres are hard to separate). What started as an alternative countermovement became so commercial that eventually it was pure Pop music. Another break in A.O.R.’s trend is the stepping of more solo and singer/songwriter artists into the spotlight instead of faceless bands. The outcome and legacy of A.O.R. was a large and soft genre, yet not targeted at teens (compared to other Pop), but specifically for adults: Adult Contemporary (which can be seen as a synonym for Soft Rock). The name Adult Contemporary did not start out as a genre but as a billboard category for music, officially installed in 1979. Adult Contemporary (or A.C.) replaced the Easy-Listening category, and as such it is rather lightweight music for more mature people who like their music relaxing and politically correct. The term A.C. got retrospectively applied to all kinds of Soft Rock, even before 1979. Unsurprisingly, there is quite some overlapping with similar genres such as Country Pop, Smooth Jazz, New Age and Singer/Songwriter. In the eighties, a small, sentimental, “sophisticated” subgenre emerged, known as Sophisti-Pop. Sophisti-Pop uses more synth than regular Soft Rock, though subdivision within the eclectic style of Soft Rock is a bit hair splitting. Adult Contemporary is still being broadcasted on specialized radio channels throughout the world, as these golden Pop Rock classics seem to have a timeless appeal.

### SYNTHPOP & NEW ROMANTICS
1981
PUNK/WAVEPOP
In the eighties, Synthpop reigns supreme: electronic New Wave that became highly popular due to the combination of a recognizable Pop/Rock song-structure and new and exciting synthesizer sounds. The release of the Yamaha DX7 in 1983 as the penultimate polyphonic synthesizer dramatically increases the production of Synthpop music. Guitars are barely noticeable, if they are present at all or not replaced by “keytars”. The difference between original New Wave and mid-eighties Synthpop is quite large. It’s less aggressive and more melodic, with less Rock and more Pop. It’s sleek and sterile, contagious and danceable, accessible and fun. Another difference is the increased emphasis on fashion, style, glamour and make-up. However, the gradual evolution from Wave to Synthpop ensures that a lot of music falls in between and New Wave becomes an interchangeable term with Synthpop. In this momentum a temporary movement also existed, known as the New Romantics: a hybrid Synthpop/Wave with Disco influences.

Synthpop can be a misguiding term, as the genre is probably the least Pop-like of all Pop genres in terms of mentality. Many Synthpop artists crave experimentalism and conceptual music, building further on the legacy of (Post-)Punk. Synthpop was also one of the few music genres heavily featured on early MTV, alongside Disco Pop, Glam Metal and Golden Age Rap. Difficult arrangements (like Post-Punk), yet simple, futuristic and flashy songs have granted Synthpop an endless appeal, with a far reaching influence and even revivals of revivals.

### HI-NRG / EURODISCO
1982
POP(r & b)
It was only a matter of time before the New Wave movement would spin out of control. At the far end of the spectrum (the final stage) was Hi-NRG (= high energy): a type of Disco/Synthpop where there was absolutely no trace of Rock left to find. This was pure Pop music: slickly produced Synthpop melodies driven by the pulsing rhythm of drum machines. Over-the-top, decadent and ecstatic Post-Disco-Proto-House indulged in a world of fashion, discotheques and upper class style and heavily associated with homosexual parties. Hi-NRG, Eurodisco or Electro-Disco is much faster and more high-pitched compared to regular Disco. There’s also very little bass, but a constant repetitive rhythm made futuristic by modulations. The most well-known Eurodisco song is Giorgio Moroder’s “I Feel Love’ (sung by Donna Summer) and it was far ahead of its time. It would take almost five years before the genre would unfold, but Moroder had already sown the seeds of all Dance music to come.

A specific trademark of Hi-NRG was the ‘megamix’: ultralong edits consisting of different songs mixed together to create a non-stop dancing machine. Megamixes were made possible by the introduction of the 12” LP single, allowing longer tracks to be released on single. These mixes showcased producers who became the very first electronic dance DJ’s.

Hi-NRG or Eurodisco is a surprisingly large genre with many subgenres. Italy developed the biggest and most familiar subgenre of Hi-NRG: Italo-Disco, full of silly melodies and lyrics that gave new meaning to the word “catchy”. France took a more futuristic and instrumental approach with Space Disco. And then there is Eurobeat: hyperfast Italo-Disco with a much stronger beat, developing in the late eighties, gaining much popularity in Japan, and forming a bridge towards Eurodance.

### DISCO POP / POST-DISCO
1984
POP(r & b)
In the aftermath of the great Disco supernova implosion, a supermassive, eclectic post-genre opened up, attracting a bit of everything that was hot at the time (but mostly Synthpop and a touch of instant recognizable glammy metallic guitar solos). The result is Discopop or Post-Disco: a collection of all Disco-based Pop music that is almost synonymous with “the sound of the eighties”. The demise of Disco happened parallel with the demise of Post-Punk, the aftershock of the oil crisis, and the steep rise of Colombian cocaine and techno-materialism. This was music for the age of superficiality: a thin layer of neon, fast vehicles, palm trees and white powder, barely capable of concealing a yolo-mentality that denied any fear it was actually based upon.

But there was more than synthesizer bands stuck in an escapist wave of Disco nostalgia. Disco-Pop is mainly the embodiment of artists with a R&B background (Soul) who got influenced by its successor Disco, but never really made pure Disco music (as this was strictly dancefloor material). Instead they released Pop crossovers and became international superstars, selling more records than anyone before. Their music is often (mistakenly) labeled as “Dance Pop”, a reference to its irresistibly moving nature. By combining the most-catchy elements of Rock, Synth and R&B, while also implementing less conventional chords and song structures, professional Pop producers donated their artists immaculately crafted superhits eternalized in music’s collective memory.

### INDIE POP (TWEE)
1986
POP(alternative)
College communities in the US had a sustained culture of amateur Singer/Songwriter during the seventies and eighties. In 1979, a third lesser known wave of Folk Rock emerged in the southern states and mingles with related Country Rock. This wave, known as College Pop, becomes more poppy, lo-fi and increasingly amateuristic in sound. By 1982, the formation of College Pop into so called “Lo-Fi Pop” is complete. In the same communities there was an interest in (Hardcore) Punk Rock’s DIY approach too as well as the brand new Jangle Pop/Indie Rock style too. This led to a softer version of the latter, with more focus on melody and less of an abrasive sound harnessing positive, sentimental emotions instead of Indie Rock’s negative angst-filled ones. Therefore Indie Pop is also sometimes known as “Twee (Pop)”. A lot of Indie Pop artists were affiliated with the noteworthy K-Records label. Indie Pop became widely known thanks to New Musical Express’s C86 tape (the successor of its C81 tape), which was a compilation of Indie Pop artists in 1986. These artists never achieved the same fame as their Rock companions, but were influential as a whole. Witnessing an unsophisticated, almost rudimentary sound by such an overwhelming amount of artists instilled a great deal of confidence in many Rock and Pop bands to come. Because even though Twee Pop is mostly associated with the late eighties, the genre is still a significant music style, harboring a vast number of Alternative Pop artists.

### DREAM POP & SHOEGAZE
1988
ALTERNATIVEPOP
From the mid-eighties till the early nineties a large psychedelic-alternative Rock scene blossomed out of the more obscure Paisley Underground movement. Just like the Paisley Underground, this Psychedelic Rock revival - known as Neo-Psy - was based on sixties’ jangly guitars and many sound effects. Around 1982-’83, Dream Pop branches off from Neo-Psy: a softer, more ambient version and in fact a kind of Proto-Post-Rock. Later, a part of Neo-Psy evolved into a new kind of “Acid Indie Rock”, called Shoegaze or Shoegazing, but sometimes Dream Pop and Shoegaze are used as interchangeable terms. Shoegaze is filled with layered, heavily distorted guitars (with feedback), washing over each other to create a spacy, atmospheric, textured sound, which is sometimes referred to as a “wall of noise”. Yet this music is (just like Stoner Rock) not really noise, just very droning, loud and psychedelic. The name Shoegaze was derived from the fact that some artists actually stared at their shoes while performing. Neo-Psy, including Dream Pop and Shoegaze, continues in the nineties, forming a parallel stream next to other Alternative Rock.

In Manchester, an influential nightlife scene evolved around Shoegaze. This scene was dubbed “Madchester” or “Baggy” (because of the artists their baggy trousers), where Indie and Acid Rock played alongside (Acid) House, bridging two separate party worlds within sacred dance temples of drugs and ecstasy (such as the legendary Hacienda club). Madchester is a genre more defined by its geographical origin and its leading label Factory Records than anything else, but extremely entertaining nevertheless.

### ASIAN POP
1991
POP
Asian Pop music is often neglected in music genealogies. The main reason is that it serves obviously as a portmanteau and when one looks at the individual Asian pop genres, the majority of them are minor reinterpretations of existing (western) genres. However, it is not world music definition-wise as the main countries of subject (China, Japan, and South-Korea) are without a doubt technically advanced. Alternative and experimental Asian music, like J-core and J-noise, are not included here but with their corresponding super-genres.

Musically, China is by the far the most conservative country, with restricted access to internet and a strong uphold of traditional Chinese music. However, China is still in a process of great revolution and has only recently (in the eighties) begun with subtle crossovers to Rock music, resulting in C-Pop. Beware: the term applies to all Chinese spoken music, not only music from China.

In Japan, there is a prominent interest in more “technological” music genres. Just like C-pop, J-pop is an umbrella term, but a much wider one, which encompasses just about any and very diverse Japanese music. Key genres are Shibuya-Kei (Urban Shoegazing) and Visual Kei (a sort of Glam Metal). Commercial Dance Pop (often consisting of girl groups) is also prominent while an escapist, minimal type of Synthpop known as Technopop in Japan, accompanies perfectly Japan’s Zen philosophy. Japan has always had an incredibly broad interest in foreign popular music and is known for demanding special Japan-distributed albums of well-known artists with more songs than the original.

In South Korea, a large shockwave of new popular culture across the country known as “Hanryu” dramatically changed the musical landscape in the last decades. Sometimes the term is also applied to Korean New Wave music, yet in a much broader meaning of the genre. Out of this music, pure K-pop emerges as an extremely fashion- and image-oriented, boysband/girlsband Electrodancepop. With the advent of music streaming and social media, K-pop became massively popular and Korea’s biggest export product. Its sexual subcontext is well placed in a country where perfection of appearance and online lifestyle is rule, not exception.

### BRITPOP
1994
POPALTERNATIVE
If every reaction has a “re-reaction”, then Britpop is the re-reaction to Grunge (since Grunge was a reaction itself against Glam Metal). Enough with all the feeble, depressing sorrow and back to glamorous Rock! This soft but catchy kind of Pop is sometimes credited as the least original genre of the nineties. On an auditory level there is indeed not much shocking: a clear wink to British (of course) Mersey Beat but roughened up by the presence of Indie Rock, with sometimes synthesizers and electronic effects to cast a certain glam mood. What makes the genre so well-known, popular and clearly defined is not its sound then, but the Rock ‘n’ Roll mentality of it: the cocky attitude of British frontmen determined to conquer the stage, steal the show and awe the masses. There is a reason for such attitude: many British bands were fed up with the overall dominance of American Rock bands in the British hit charts of the early nineties (mostly due to Grunge). As such they created a strong anti-American music genre, with a very narrow range of influences (all British). Of course, the sound, vocals and song structure are all means to this end. Which explains why Britpop is same meat, different gravy, but very attractive.

### DANCE POP
1995
POP
In the eighties, Pop music changed from a pure trade commodity (records to sell to teens) to a much bigger enterprise: a party and concert industry, where vast wealth was possible to obtain. The Live Aid concert in 1984 for example (one of the biggest concerts of all time) is a pivotal moment. After Disco-Pop, major record labels turned their eye towards Dance music, as Eurodance had proven to be very profitable. Thus, Dance Pop is the fusion of Dance (mostly House) with Pop and is not the same as Disco-Pop or Urban Pop, though a large amount of overlapping is fairly common in the eclectic world of Pop music, where sell value presides over genre integrity. Most Dance Pop artists are girlsbands or boysbands, the epitome of capitalistic Pop. Choreographed ensembles of young girls or boys create an illusion of identification by having a different stereotypical personality, but all aimed at one thing: selling sex. More than ever before, Dance Pop marketed itself to young teens (whether male or female) with the sex-appeal of barely older artists. In Dance-Pop, the music is far more important than the lyrics, which only serves as catchy sing-along phrases.

Besides girlsbands, boysbands and Dance Pop soloists, a new wave of Eurodance artists started to make an incredibly poppy and lightweight version of Eurohouse at the end of the nineties, ushering in the end of the genre. This genre, “Eurodance Pop”, is a lot less R&B influenced than pure Dance Pop and more uptempo with stronger beats.

### POST-BRITPOP
1999
CONTEMPORARYPOP
Despite the aversion of relevant bands to the label “Post-Britpop” and claims that genre fragmentation within Britpop is pointless, this style is a lot more defined than what you would expect. Britpop’s patriotism got in the way of experimentation and American or Indie influences. Yet a second wave of British artists in the late nineties valued these merits higher than cultural preservation. A clear distinction with their predecessors is the rejection of guitar as the dominant instrument, in favor of a more electronically oriented sound. Another key alteration is the absence of Britpop’s cocky attitude, which got replaced by highly sensitive, fragile lyrics. Post-Britpop is symbolized by a loss of ego. Avant-garde bands like Radiohead and The Verve spearheaded this transition in their later works, but were only a vague sign of things to come. The popularity of Post-Britpop bands quickly outgrew traditional Britpop, making Post-Britpop a sort of Stadium Rock of the nillies. A number of bands returned to the original sound of Britpop, but with contemporary Rock influences such as The Kaiser Chiefs or Bloc Party. With success comes envy and Post-Britpop songs eventually became accused of sounding too uniform, sterile and predictable. Coupled with whiter-than-white sound production and high-pitched male vocals, the way was paved for a countering return to sleazy, lo-fi Garage Rock.

### ELECTROCLASH (NU WAVE)
2001
POP(house)
Twenty years after its arrival, Synthpop (and the New Wave subculture around it) was badly due for a comeback. Probably because people were fed up with the same House/Techno/Trance beat being recycled in unending ways. The great EDM revolution was past its peak and not interesting anymore. A return to the experimental approach of synthesizer sound, the submissive role of the beat, artsy lyrics and a heavy focus on image, design and fashion were the key ingredients that could barely disguise this genre as something new (though there was of course an evolution of instruments, computers and influences from House noticeable). Indeed, Electroclash is Synthpop version 2.0 and righteously referred to as “Nu Wave” (but it also features a lot of Minimal Wave influences). But originality, that wasn’t the point. Electroclash was music of fun and nonsense, that didn’t desperately try to be innovative or revolutionary. A testament that the new millennium (and Dance along with it) hadn’t changed the world and that it didn’t matter. Electroclash is often also marked as the start of retro-futurism, with themes of coldness, isolation and alienation. A theme further expanded by Synthwave and Vaporwave.

### INDIETRONICA & CHILLWAVE
2005
CONTEMPORARYPOP
Long after the Madchester explosion (and the fall), Shoegaze was rediscovered as a perfect ingredient for a remarkable melting pot: Synthpop, Electronica, and Shoegazing went pretty well together in a new type of “Ambient New Wave Indie Rock” that could either be called Nu-Gaze, Indietronica or Chillwave depending on matter of perspective or whether the core structure of a certain song is either Rock (New (Shoe)Gaze), Pop/Wave (Chillwave) or Downtempo (Indie (elec)tronica). Therefore two different songs belonging to this genre can very well sound rather different. Unsurprisingly, this is a fairly broad and flexible genre, which can easily tap into a wide spectrum of related genres. Where Nu-Gaze is rather an obscure and rare genre and Indietronica too loosely defined, Chillwave is the genre that comes closest to a certain definition. A definition that easily swallows the other genres as well (illustrated by Chillwave’s alias: Downtempo Pop). After all, this is the age of eclecticism. Chillwave has a very summery mood, full of optimism and dreamy Pop vocals. Eighties retro (further enhanced in a dark way by the successor Synthwave) and lots of reverb on different song parts make it seem like Dream Pop is back from the dead. Another synonym, “Glo-Fi”, also points out parallels between Chillwave and the Dream Pop/Shoegaze era.

A term frequently associated with these latest Rock genres (but obviously applicable to others as well), is “Laptronica”: electronic music performed entirely by simply a laptop. But Laptronica qualifies rather as a derogatory slur from Rock bands and journalists who favor a classic instrumentation (even though Indietronica and exponents often do have one).

### ELECTROPOP
2006
POP
Electropop can be used as a comprehensive term encompassing all forms of Electronic or synthesizer-used Pop. In its narrow definition, it is the latest development of dominant mainstream and dance-oriented Pop music.

If Dance Pop is the Disco-influenced mainstream music of the eighties and nineties, then Electropop is the Electro-influenced mainstream music of the nillies and tens. The word “Electro” here concerns the combination of both Electroclash (and thus Synthpop indirectly) and Electro-House. Particularly the latter is important, as it has introduced low frequency synth sounds in Electropop, often in a rough, distorted manner. This makes Electropop a lot “nastier” and daring than its predecessor Dance Pop, while also focusing on a more mature audience. A very small subgenre, Wonky Pop, was briefly popular at the end of the nillies, but being only defined by the use of “unstable” or “wonky” sounds in Electropop, it is hardly worth considering a true genre. By the turn of the millennium, all Disco and House elements in hit chart music were not fresh and contemporary anymore. Electroclash and later Electrohouse changed the focus in Pop from a warm R&B-type groove beat to a crisper sound with higher dynamic range. This has made the music somewhat less infectious compared to Dance-Pop, but more eclectic and flexible, thus able to reach an even larger audience.

Where Dance Pop was heavily steered out of a record label or producer’s perspective, Electropop artists take great pride in own personality and personal touch. Remarkable is the fact that almost all Electropop artists are female vocalists. Despite the fact that they are pushed forward nowadays by record companies due to a loyal idolizing female fanbase and a seductive image of sex to attract a male fanbase, they are all well-aware entrepreneurs: an interesting discrepancy with the historical dominance of male (puppet) crooners in Brill Building Pop. In a certain way, Electropop marks the end of an industry’s century-long hegemony, starting all the way with Tin Pan Alley: Pop Inc.

### INDIE FOLK & FREAKFOLK / NEW WEIRD AMERICA
2008
CONTEMPORARYPOP
Although this genre is obviously a form of Folk music, a large and welcoming familiarity within Rock/Pop circles combined with a heavy influence from popular music justifies its presence on the map. In fact, Freakfolk is so eclectic that it cannot belong to only one super-genre and is sometimes called Free Folk. As a subgenre of Indie Folk (which is any combination of Alternative/Contemporary Rock and Folk) it started off rather slowly around 2003. Psychedelic Folk Rock Bands such as The Incredible String Band, Holy Modal Rounders and Comus inspired diverse artists into a new, hypnotic and druggy kind of Folk. Modal based structure (like Modal Jazz) and multi-layering of freaky sounds with the most unusual instruments are the primary contributors to its experimental nature. It’s hard to put a common denominator on Freakfolk’s sound, which is exactly why it’s called that way or by its synonym: New Weird America.

Indie Folk's history can be traced back to the nineties, when Alternative Rock bands revive Folk once more. But it wasn’t until the arrival of certain promiscuous Electropop singles and later Moombahton and derivatives that both Indie Folk and Freakfolk really build up momentum. This youth-oriented, twerk-friendly, hyperactive and formulaic music pushed Freakfolk and Indie Folk even more in the opposite direction, and created an incentive for more mature, honorable and unpredictable music. The latest forms of Indie Folk (which have become highly popular, like e.g. Mumford & Sons) are also known as Nu-Folk.

