
# ROCK, HARDCORE PUNK
Hardcore Punk evolved out of the dominant musical era of Punk Rock in the late seventies. When the eighties arrived, many artists were fed up with Punk’s excesses (or at least Punk’s reputation as media liked to exaggerate on its scandals), or else they were disillusioned by the evaporation of Punk’s political message. What started as merely a subgenre of Punk (among many others), grew exponentially both in the US and the UK. A number of bands were on the rise that tried to implement either political content or a notion of purity: both in music and lifestyle. Hardcore bands emerged like fresh mushrooms from the rotten Punk soil. Especially in the US, every region or city received its own famous Hardcore band and every high school experienced their local amateur Hardcore teen band.

Technically, Hardcore is based on Punk Rock, but much faster and with shorter, bursting songs. It’s like a Punk Rock song of three or four minutes is compressed in a time span of less than two minutes. Such high speed has obviously an effect on voice: Hardcore vocalists shout with short bursting strokes, almost like an army sergeant. Instrumentation, song structure and sound manipulation however, stay similar to Punk.

Hardcore is more defined within its lifestyle: a subculture of discipline and purity. Many Hardcore bands and fans live by a strict anti-hedonist code, with no drugs, healthy food, bald or shaven haircut, jeans and shirts, and badges or pins marking honor and respect. Nevertheless, the average perception of Hardcore Punk leans towards the negative, as the music is often associated with aggression and violence due to the musical content and the appearance of fans or bands. But this is mostly because of a lack of knowledge about the subculture.

A strong sense of community and pride sways over Hardcore culture, with recurring mottos like “Hardcore Will Never Die” and “Forever Hardcore”. It is peculiar to see that the same mentality of strength - with comradeship and slogans - is also traceable in Hardcore Techno, a genre that technically is very different from Hardcore Punk. Mosh pits, a type of “dance” where the crowd violently starts kicking and pushing each other around (“moshing”) in a circle, also found its origin in Hardcore culture and remains a common part of it.

Hardcore is mostly an underground thing; mainstream radio or TV attention is minimal, despite a very radio friendly format (regarding song length). Instead, Hardcore lives – stronger than any other super-genre – in the show or gig. Hardcore gigs are smaller than other ones and usually indoors. However, the crowd is often downright fanatic and the interaction between band and crowd is bigger, with smaller and lower stages. There where the DIY approach of Hardcore gets translated into performance, where electric synergy between band and crowd occurs, where mosh pits organically evolve and dissolve again, where communities get formed…that is where Hardcore is home.

By merging with Heavy Metal, Hardcore Punk diversifies and knows how to reinvent itself. But the most intriguing thing about Hardcore is not the music or subculture, but a far-reaching ethos of DIY (do-it-yourself) that exposes society conventions within music industry and how they are all too easily accepted instead of challenged. Hardcore works largely with small record labels, or band members release their very own record label. Artists become entrepreneurs and distance themselves from capitalism. With the help of local support, such as T-shirt sales, they manage to survive and maintain their musical integrity. Though certainly not all Hardcore bands were anti-commercial or against major record companies. In fact, the failure of a mainstream breakthrough of (Post-)Hardcore bands, urged certain bands to change their sound. This offered them a larger audience, though they were still forced to work with smaller, independent labels. And thus Indie Rock was born.


## Sub-Genres

### ANARCHO-PUNK, CRUST PUNK, & D-BEAT / DISCORE
1977
PUNK/WAVEHARDCORE
Punk Rock was besides music also a marketing machine, cleverly steered by the movement’s frontman and Sex Pistol’s manager Malcolm Mclaren. In response, a new subgenre answered to the machine: Anarcho-Punk (which lent its name from the Sex Pistol’s infamous single “Anarchy in the UK”). It wasn’t really anarchistic though, mostly reactionary towards Punk Rock. These bands swore by heavy DIY approach, little marketing or publicity, and by their own record production, forming the prelude to Hardcore Punk. A strong community sense, is another trademark of Anarcho-Punk, both by the artists and their fans. But most importantly (as there is not much difference in sound with early Punk Rock) are real political messages, fueled by a distaste for the lyrical shallowness of some of Punk Rock’s most famous bands. Political reaction grew stronger when conservative Margaret Thatcher took office in the UK in 1979, who proved to be a long lasting punching bag for Punk’s offspring genres.

A while after the development of Hardcore Punk (around 1985), Anarcho-Punk gets heavily influenced by Extreme Metal (both Black and Speed). This is clearly discernible in both a more chaotic and faster sound. Two Punk Rock subgenres emerge: Crust (Punk) aka Crustcore and D-Beat or Discore. Crust is a heavy, bass-filled style, much more nihilistic and bleak than Anarcho and the predecessor of Grindcore. D-Beat or Discore is a smaller and more straightforward style named after its repetitive, stuttering drum beats, which was particularly popular in Sweden.

### ORIGINAL HARDCORE (PUNK)
1980
HARDCORE
If Punk did survive, then it was in the spirit of Hardcore. Only this kind of no-nonsense rock harbored the bursting energy typical of Punk and even took it a step further. Hardcore (Punk) is extremely fast, raw, heavy and explosive. Many hardcore songs are even less than two minutes. It’s just a kick in the head with drums, guitars and shouting, angry vocals. The anarchy and chaos tangible in the music (just like Punk) seems to be the direct opposite of Hardcore’s disciplined lifestyle: Hardcore artists and fans are often known to be puritanical, non-hedonistic, strict and loyal. Some subgroups take this very seriously (almost militant) and have their own subgenres such as Straight-Edge. The reason for this paradox (anarchy versus order) can be explained by the inner core of hardcore, its essence: protest. Hardcore is all about critique on society, government and lifestyle.

Original Hardcore rose fast to popularity, leaving a long trail of subgenres in its wake: Straight-Edge (very purist and full of selfrespect), Bent-Edge (more the opposite), Beatdown Hardcore (very heavy and slower, leading to Deathcore), Nardcore (local California scene), and last-but-not-least Melodic Hardcore, which traded some velocity and fierceness for melody. New York was (and still is) one of the most important spawning pools of Hardcore, which led to the term New York Hardcore (N.Y.H.C.), but this is not really a separate subgenre.

### CROSSOVER THRASH
1983
HARDCOREMETAL
Original Hardcore rapidly splintered into many important subgenres after its rise: the melodic Melocore, the ruthless Powerviolence, and the Punk fusions Crust-punk and Discore. Hereafter the natural fusion of two heavy guitar genres (Metal & Hardcore) led to a large, hard-to-define family of music, known as Crossover Thrash. Because the word Thrash is also an early synonym for Original Hardcore, Crossover Thrash actually has a two-way interpretation: Hardcore crossing over into Thrash Metal and the other way around. Within this aggressive whirlpool of genres, we find a new one: Thrashcore or Fastcore. Hardcore Punk became even faster, with even shorter songs, forcing the drummer to incorporate a new style of thrashing drumwork to match the insane tempo, called “Blast Beats”. Some Hardcore bands, such as Suicidal Tendencies and Bad Religion, created a faster type of music strongly linked to the Skater subculture. This early form or first wave of Skate Punk shared a lot of similarities with Thrashcore. Because many related bands experiment with all these genres (Skate Punk, Thrashcore, and both Thrash crossovers), their musical crossovers form an interesting, blurry mix of styles conjoined as Crossover Thrash; a noun often forgotten in favor of its more successful successors Grindcore and Metalcore. Crossover Thrash glorifies brevity: there’s not a moment to waste and even band names become abbreviated to signify a concentrated essence of purity and an acronym emanating power.

### GRINDCORE
1986
HARDCOREMETAL
Soon a new genre emerged in the world of Hardcore, even faster than Speed Metal (or anything else). Grindcore is arguably one of the most extreme genres in the world of music. It is characterized by maximum-speed, ‘grinding’ buzzsaw guitars, bursting lyrics and special, hyperspeed repetitiveness and machinegun-like drum kicks (known as blast beats). With its non-defined song structure and maximal distortion and speed, Grindcore could appear as the ultimate protest genre, but it has lost this essence in its pursue for provocation and extremity. Almost all Grindcore tries to be as gory, shocking and politically incorrect as possible, leading to subgenres with dubious names depending on subject matter such as Pornogrind and Goregrind. Although Grindcore did not originate from (the first wave of) Death Metal, both genres share much resemblance in their sound experimentation and their love for lyrics about pain and have been influencing each other during their respective evolution.

### POST-HARDCORE,EMO & SCREAMO
1989
HARDCORE
Post-Hardcore can be either a genre on its own or an umbrella term for any “pure” Hardcore-derivative (i.e. without links to Metal). Just like Post-Punk differs from Punk, so does Post-Hardcore differ from Hardcore as a less bursting, less aggressive continuation of the genre (though still more heavy than other Rock genres). Post-Hardcore implements a longer and more complex arrangement, with tempo changes adding a certain alternating dynamic to Hardcore. Besides screaming or grunting, Post-Hardcore also allows “normal” vocals, usually wailing about depressing or introspective thoughts. Similar to Pop Punk or Nu Metal, it is a prime example of so called “Therapy Rock”: music as self-psychology.

Post-Hardcore is dividable into three waves. The first one started in the mid eighties and encloses only a number of avant-garde bands. In the second wave, Post-Punk along with its Dub and Fusion influences further molded Post-Hardcore into a versatile adventurer. The third and most important wave encompasses Screamo and Emocore (or Emo): a poetic, emotional genre with quiet, slower passages and more artistic lyrics. Emo tries to break the ties with Original Hardcore, which was deemed too conservative and uniform. Screamo (a variant of Emo) adds screaming vocals. In the nillies, Screamo gets further detached from Hardcore (towards Metal) and becomes more polished while riffs become more metallic.

Post-Hardcore is still a very large and living genre, with recent yet dubious subgenres, such as “Crabcore”. Mathcore (listed on the Carta as a sibling to Math Rock) is often also regarded as a part of Post-Hardcore.

### MATH ROCK & MATHCORE
1992
HARDCOREALTERNATIVE
If there would be such a thing as “Intelligent Rock Music” or “IRM”, it would probably be Math Rock. Pioneering artists can be traced back as early as 1988, but Math Rock takes its mature form after the emergence of Post Rock. Its name is derived from experimenting with asymmetrical complex time signatures that give a jagged and chaotic sound. These experiments are so technical and far-reaching, that “mathemical” is a proper way to describe them. Particularly the pronounced drum rhythms (with breaks and interrupts) are treated this way. Drums take lead over voice, which becomes (along with the lyrics) less important.

Math Rock and Mathcore obviously have a common “mathematical” dimension, but they are very different genres. In 1993, the first traces of Mathcore appear; a forerunner of the later Metalcore. Because Mathcore evolved alongside Metalcore and eventually becomes a subgenre of it, the difference between Mathcore and Math Metal is minimal. In fact, it wasn’t until 1999 (after Metalcore) that the phrase Mathcore was coined. Before that, it was known as the loosely defined Noisecore. Mathcore combines the speed and energy of Hardcore and Metal with the complexity and non-structure of Jazz and unconventional Classical Music.

### METALCORE / NWOAHM (NEW WAVE OF AMERICAN HEAVY METAL)
1999
HARDCOREMETAL
In a desperate attempt to prevent Nu Metal from remaining the last chapter in the history of Heavy Metal and to prove that Metal would survive in the 21st century, the ambiguous term NWOAHM (New Wave of American Heavy Metal) was conceived. This was far from necessary, as Metal is perhaps the only super-genre were all different styles are still being practiced and performed intensively. At first, this wave of American bands seemed only unified in their stance against Nu-Metal, but gradually a specific, well-defined genre unfolded, named Metalcore. It must be noted that Metalcore already had a long and experimental history before Nu Metal, emerging shortly after Crossover Thrash, but remaining rather obscure before the mid nineties. Instead of mutually aggravating each other towards the extreme like Grindcore, Metalcore is a balanced mix of Hardcore and (Death) Metal elements, which undoubtedly has led to longer, more complex songs. The song structure and mentality is still Hardcore, but with a slower drum beat and metallic single note guitars. Metalcore is the least emotional type of Hardcore, which has led to the hyperrational, technical Mathcore or Math Metal and Math Rock. Other, lesser known subgenres include Melodic Metalcore, Noisecore, Deathcore, and Nintendocore. Metalcore is a forced marriage between Hardcore Punk and Metal in order to save both genres their legacies, despite mutual differences. Nevertheless, Metalcore’s numerous offspring subgenres prove the healthiness of this marriage in one way or another.

### SYNTHCORE & CRUNKCORE
2003
HARDCORE
After more than twenty years, the purity of Hardcore evaporated by adding sequencers and synthesizers on top of its simple, strict Rock instrumentarium. However, Hardcore has always been a genre with a tendency to crossover, whether it’s Punk, Ska, Metal, or Rap. Electronicore or Synthcore (or Trancecore) is Metalcore with contrasting (by default) synth melodies, which makes for some interesting unexpected sounds. Sometimes the singer also uses Autotune, which makes Electronicore sound more poplike and commercial then other Hardcore genres.

Another similar and extreme crossover of Hardcore Punk, evolving around the same time, is Crunkcore (aka Crunk Punk, Screamo-Crunk or Scrunk). Crunkcore is the unexpected fusion of Screamo and Crunk (a form of South Rap). Crunkcore also uses Autotune and influences from EDM (particularly Techno) like Synthcore. Crunkcore has very little Hardcore spirit left: the bottom line of almost every song evolves around a frantic theatrics of “partyin’ down”, as if southern rappers tried to disguise themselves as a fraternity hardcore band at a college party.

The difference between Synthcore and Crunkcore is large but they both represent a type of Hardcore that strays far away from its roots into unknown territory. With Synthcore’s “dangerous” leap towards Electronic music, confusion in the world of genres is at an all-time high, as both (Hardcore) Techno and (Hardcore) Punk spawn different types of “-cores” with identical names (such as Trancecore). However, a fusion is never out of reach; as speed, loudness and discipline tie these outer worlds together.