# Rock, ALTERNATIVE ROCK / INDIE
Alternative Rock became a huge phenomenon during the nineties and virtually dominated the entire Rock scene during that decade. But the term is rather vague, as what Rock genre from the mid-eighties onwards could really be considered mainstream? Rock has always been the problem child of music, violently kicking around and upsetting whomever it can. Alternative Rock is therefore a collection of different styles from the mid-eighties till the end of the millennium, yet with more common ground than contemporary Rock genres.

Alternative or “Alt” Rock is recognizable by jangly guitars, lots of distortion pedals, distortion on amps, sentimental or dark lyrics and sometimes small influences from synth. This has led to much “thicker” and heavier music, like an angry wall of sound; especially compared to the rather bare Punk Rock. Songs are often longer than any other Rock super-genre (apart from Prog Rock) and average tempo is lower than R‘n’R, Punk Rock, or Hardcore, making it fairly slow as far as Rock goes.

The name Indie Rock comes from the abbreviation of “independent” as in independent record label, also known as an “indie”. Indies are smaller, less profit oriented companies as opposed to big-business major record companies, known as “majors”. Indies were either a deliberate choice or the only resort for a large stream of young amateur bands. These starting musicians felt either very strong about the integrity of their music, which they didn’t want to jeopardize by the whims of major producers, or they failed to break through into mainstream.

Alternative Rock and Indie Rock are synonyms. The latter is the term used by the British music press and the former by the American press at the time of the music’s heydays. Sometimes Indie Rock is reserved for the first wave of Alternative Rock (during the eighties), because at that time all bands were signed up to indies. After the success of Grunge, more alternative Rock bands get signed up to bigger labels, forcing the British and American press to switch terms, while American journalists also refer to their first wave of Alt Rock as “College Rock”.

Alternative Rock is highly underestimated considering the Big Boom of EDM bursting open at the same time. During that era, Rock remained a tower of strength, defying this avalanche of brand new, exciting electronic music genres. The reason for such popularity is unclear, but an important contributor is the fact that Alternative Rock knew how to connect to all the anger, frustration, doubt, fear and depression of the youth of the nineties. More than any other super-genre, Alternative Rock is a psychologist digging deep into the dark soul of any teenager or adolescent and acting as a tourniquet to heal wounds with music. A strong anti-establishment mentality (against majors, governments, or shallow society conventions) also helped Indie keep Rock alive until the new millennium.

Two merits that mark pivotal moments in music history fall on behalf of Indie. On one hand, an increase in attention towards young, up-and-coming Rock talent with more labels, chances to perform and more alternative radio stations. On the other hand, the way becomes paved for female Rock (and Pop) artists. Common words in the music industry like “front-man” ceased to make sense, exposing their sexist nature that sprouted from a long lasting tradition of Rock macho culture.

Indie Rock hasn’t gone extinct, but lives on as a parallel Rock stream in the nillies and tens (3rd wave of Alternative Rock). The genre is still popular, but this has also to do with the fact that the term has become an easy label for any raw, traditional, heavy Rock band that is hard to categorize. Retrospectively, a lot of bands that were labeled (or even are being labeled) as “Alternative” weren’t really. The word alternative just sounded pretty cool in conjunction with Rock: it was a perfect marketing device that dwelled on a mainstream-phobia among adolescents and artists alike.

 

## Sub-Genres

### JANGLE POP / INDIE ROCK (& PAISLEY UNDERGROUND)
1985
ALTERNATIVE
By the end of the eighties, the power of Hard Rock or the spirit of Punk Rock seemed nowhere to be found. The majority of Rock had become electronic and commercialized (Synthpop). Many Generation X rock artists tried to stay away from the big record companies (the “Majors”) to prevent their music from succumbing to the same fate and turned to smaller, independent labels instead (the “Indies”), where they had the freedom to make what they liked: serious, downbeat rock with heavy, distorted guitar riffs, often dealing about emotional troubles or tragic thoughts. Many important indies (who later became majors) were part of this era: SST, Dischord, and Sire Records. Alternative Rock takes pride in an entirely self-made process through teamwork, college radio support, and peer collaborations. The music consciously partakes in the debate about music industry, with a strong stance against MTV, video clips, compact discs, and a stance pro vinyl and artistic graphic design. To strengthen and justify its own point of view, Indie Rock often uses objectified lyrics instead of a personal perspective.

Early Alternative Rock music was primarily college radio music (thus for and by students), with jangly guitars and a minimal attention to rhythm. Therefore it became known as “Jangle Pop”. Closely related and heavily overlapping with college Jangle Pop was the Paisley Underground movement (named after the artists their retro psy paisley shirts) : a revival of 60s Psychedelic Rock in L.A. with a variety of Rock and Folk influences, fueled by a loathing escape from Glam Metal.

### NOISE ROCK
1986
ALTERNATIVE
Noise Rock started much later than its predecessor No Wave (around 1986-’87) as a small but influential offshoot. In a way, the genre is a sort of missing link between Hardcore Punk and Alternative Rock. Inspired by not only Hardcore’s aggression but also its strict and drug-free lifestyle, Noise Rock deliberately turned its back on the excesses of the final Punk Rock movement. Noise Rock artists liked Punk Rock, but they were repulsed by what it had turned into. Idealism and revolution were replaced by nonchalance and chain tweaking. Based on Proto Punk Rock’s experimentation and No Wave’s nihilistic and destructive mentality, Noise Rock used that aversion to fuel songs of high-octane hate. Unsurprisingly, Noise Rock is extremely atonal/dissonant with massive guitar feedback. This just in case some milliseconds of the song would not be saturated with noise. Riffs are slower than Hardcore Punk, but faster than most Rock and often at low frequency. Singers scream angry lyrics on (or over) the top of their lungs that usually make no sense whatsoever or are highly offensive. The result is a serious contender for the most chaotic of all genres including Grindcore and Black Metal. Besides the US, Japan is a large distributor of Noise Rock (the country’s history of chaotic music is unparalleled worldwide). Noise Rock should not be confused with Noise Pop, which is related but very different and more similar to Dream Pop. Though small and unpopular, Noise Rock was a great influence on later music genres, such as Sludge (thanks to the Melvins) and Grunge.

### DREAM POP & SHOEGAZE
1988
ALTERNATIVEPOP
From the mid-eighties till the early nineties a large psychedelic-alternative Rock scene blossomed out of the more obscure Paisley Underground movement. Just like the Paisley Underground, this Psychedelic Rock revival - known as Neo-Psy - was based on sixties’ jangly guitars and many sound effects. Around 1982-’83, Dream Pop branches off from Neo-Psy: a softer, more ambient version and in fact a kind of Proto-Post-Rock. Later, a part of Neo-Psy evolved into a new kind of “Acid Indie Rock”, called Shoegaze or Shoegazing, but sometimes Dream Pop and Shoegaze are used as interchangeable terms. Shoegaze is filled with layered, heavily distorted guitars (with feedback), washing over each other to create a spacy, atmospheric, textured sound, which is sometimes referred to as a “wall of noise”. Yet this music is (just like Stoner Rock) not really noise, just very droning, loud and psychedelic. The name Shoegaze was derived from the fact that some artists actually stared at their shoes while performing. Neo-Psy, including Dream Pop and Shoegaze, continues in the nineties, forming a parallel stream next to other Alternative Rock.

In Manchester, an influential nightlife scene evolved around Shoegaze. This scene was dubbed “Madchester” or “Baggy” (because of the artists their baggy trousers), where Indie and Acid Rock played alongside (Acid) House, bridging two separate party worlds within sacred dance temples of drugs and ecstasy (such as the legendary Hacienda club). Madchester is a genre more defined by its geographical origin and its leading label Factory Records than anything else, but extremely entertaining nevertheless.

### GRUNGE
1989
ALTERNATIVE(metal)
The focus on glamour and fashion in many eighties’ music formed the catalyst of a fierce anti-movement. Fierce may not exactly be the right word for it. Being the complete opposite of Glam Rock, this so-called “Grunge” (the name is negative slang for horrible noisy rock) was humble and inwards, with sincere songs about tragedy and frustrations. The sound on the other hand was dirty, distorted, lo-fi, vintage and crunchy as if it was composed by accident. Grunge often uses distortion on the amps, creating an even more abrasive sound. Grunge “fashion” reinforces such a notion of nonchalance: blue jeans, woolen lumberjack shirts, and dirty, sleazy long hair.

Grunge’s brief but crowd-gathering music revolution started all in the cold and remote city of Seattle. Typical about the Seattle music scene in the eighties was a high popularity of Classic and Thrash Metal. When emotional Post-Hardcore bands pop up all across the states, the genre gets mixed with Metal and becomes Grunge (it is often said that Grunge is one part Metal one part Hardcore/Rock). Grunge is closely related to the second wave of Alternative Rock, which was an immediate result of it. Within the negative emotional context of Grunge and Alt Rock, resorting to heroin use is not uncommon, further adding to the tragedy. The success of Grunge lies in the strength of a return to the mutual core of Rock and Blues. Something that had been lost along the way: raw, unbridled emotion that seemed so hard to bear that it even distorted the music itself.

### RAP ROCK /RAPCORE / FUNK METAL
1990
ALTERNATIVE(rap)
The combination of Rock and Rap found its origin in the eighties, with the desire of Run DMC’s producers to reach a bigger audience and restyle Aerosmith’s “Walk This Way” into a Rap Song. But at the start of the nineties, a real genre emerges: Hard Alternative, Rap Rock, Rapcore, or Funk Metal. Strictly speaking, these are all different genres but so closely related, it’s pointless to separate them. In short, they are heavier, faster types of Alternative Rock, with strong influences from (classic East Coast) Rap music, sharing the same ferocity and anti-commercial mindset. One must not forget after all, that Rap was still “fresh” in 1990 (especially in Europe) even though it was already sixteen years old. As a result, artists were eager to infuse Rap in contrasting genres such as Acid House and Hardcore/Alt Rock.

The lyrics are fast, in a raplike way (or even true raps), and the music is more rhythmical than other types of Rock. Both Rock and Rap artists crossed over to each other’s side, but unfortunately the genre didn’t break through in mainstream charts. Even the conceptual “Judgement Day” soundtrack - an experiment of teaming up harder Rock bands with aggressive Rap bands – failed to meet the (high) sale expectations.

Sometimes Rap Rock crosses over into anything remotely raplike, such as Funk (called Funk Metal, though it is barely Metal at all), Breakbeat, or even Reggae/Ragga. Rapcore (Hardcore + Rap) gradually became harder, more experimental and mixed with Metal, evolving into Nu-Metal or Rap Metal.

### SKATE PUNK & POP PUNK
1992
ALTERNATIVEPUNK/WAVE
Both Skate Punk and Pop Punk already existed before the nineties, but were rather obscure subgenres at that time, especially Pop Punk. A second wave or technically a revival of these genres was accelerated by the success of Grunge and the interest in rough guitar music by major record labels that came along with it. Pop Punk and Skate Punk deliver the bursting, loud mouthing energy of Punk, neatly tucked into a flashy jacket of Pop. Where the latter genre consists of independent artists strongly linked to skater or extreme/urban sport subculture, the former is the product of a marketing hype towards (skater) teens, with a strong lack of integrity in their lyrics (like 25-year olds pretending to be still in high school).

Both genres are strongly teen/adolescent oriented, with lyrics that attempt to make sense in their daily lives (Pop Punk bands were purely designed for this like a “bad” boysband). Topics of heartbreak, drugs, friendship, and anti-establishment, often in a rebellious way, are perfect for the reactionary teenager but not too explicit to sell in large volumes. But Skate Punk can go much deeper and become highly political, such as the reactionary “Rock Against Bush” movement.

Both genres qualify as Punk Rock revivals, albeit with Metal and Grunge influences. Pop Punk and Skate Punk are Punk because they are aggressive with mainly short and explosive songs. On the other hand they are also Pop, with their melodic sing along tunes or even anthems.

### MATH ROCK & MATHCORE
1992
HARDCOREALTERNATIVE
If there would be such a thing as “Intelligent Rock Music” or “IRM”, it would probably be Math Rock. Pioneering artists can be traced back as early as 1988, but Math Rock takes its mature form after the emergence of Post Rock. Its name is derived from experimenting with asymmetrical complex time signatures that give a jagged and chaotic sound. These experiments are so technical and far-reaching, that “mathemical” is a proper way to describe them. Particularly the pronounced drum rhythms (with breaks and interrupts) are treated this way. Drums take lead over voice, which becomes (along with the lyrics) less important.

Math Rock and Mathcore obviously have a common “mathematical” dimension, but they are very different genres. In 1993, the first traces of Mathcore appear; a forerunner of the later Metalcore. Because Mathcore evolved alongside Metalcore and eventually becomes a subgenre of it, the difference between Mathcore and Math Metal is minimal. In fact, it wasn’t until 1999 (after Metalcore) that the phrase Mathcore was coined. Before that, it was known as the loosely defined Noisecore. Mathcore combines the speed and energy of Hardcore and Metal with the complexity and non-structure of Jazz and unconventional Classical Music.

### ALTERNATIVE ROCK / INDIE ROCK II
1993
ALTERNATIVE
Alternative Rock is almost never divided into two distinct genres, but just like Dubstep and Nu R&B, it should be. After the big Grunge revolution, Indie Rock experienced a metamorphosis and splintered in many subgenres, which were all a response to Grunge in one way (positive) or another (negative).

Many Indie Rock artists changed the genre into a darker, heavier version of itself, with more desperate tragedy and angry frustration in its lyrics. It also lost some of its Hardcore and DIY influences, with songs becoming longer, more complex and better produced. The second wave of Alternative Rock was no longer truly alternative, and their artists less and less a part of independent record labels. Some Alternative Rock bands even became bestselling stars, filling Rock festivals (also in an after-Grunge state of booming) for decades to come. With so many spotlights on Alt Rock, a tremendous opportunity unveiled itself for the innumerable amount of independent female front artists to tilt Rock music from a macho, male-dominated bastion into what appeared as gender equality: arguably the biggest emancipation wave in music history. Some women went further and created a Punk-influenced feminist subgenre, known as Riot Grrrl.

But instead of building further on Grunge’s legacy, a number of alternative subgenres reacted against it. There was too much stardom and too much focus from majors on Grunge and Alternative Rock. Kurt Cobain’s suicide (frontman of Nirvana) in 1994 was an immediate and cataclysmic consequence of this, which rocked the entire world of popular music to its foundation. Two underground subgenres emerged: the heavily under-produced Lo-Fi (Rock) and the minimal Slo(w)core aka Sadcore. Lo-Fi is primarily defined by its low-fidelity sound, which can take on extreme forms (imagine a cassette tape that is nearing the end of its lifecycle) to ensure a total rencouncement of mainstream attendance. Slowcore is a very important subgenre (and still popular) that is deliberately the opposite of Grunge: gentle and slow, placid, and filled with tender, fragile sounds.

### BRITPOP
1994
POPALTERNATIVE
If every reaction has a “re-reaction”, then Britpop is the re-reaction to Grunge (since Grunge was a reaction itself against Glam Metal). Enough with all the feeble, depressing sorrow and back to glamorous Rock! This soft but catchy kind of Pop is sometimes credited as the least original genre of the nineties. On an auditory level there is indeed not much shocking: a clear wink to British (of course) Mersey Beat but roughened up by the presence of Indie Rock, with sometimes synthesizers and electronic effects to cast a certain glam mood. What makes the genre so well-known, popular and clearly defined is not its sound then, but the Rock ‘n’ Roll mentality of it: the cocky attitude of British frontmen determined to conquer the stage, steal the show and awe the masses. There is a reason for such attitude: many British bands were fed up with the overall dominance of American Rock bands in the British hit charts of the early nineties (mostly due to Grunge). As such they created a strong anti-American music genre, with a very narrow range of influences (all British). Of course, the sound, vocals and song structure are all means to this end. Which explains why Britpop is same meat, different gravy, but very attractive.

### POST-GRUNGE
1995
ALTERNATIVE
In the mid-nineties Grunge was barely a shadow of its former self. Its demise had not been in vain however. Many new Rock bands filled the hole that Grunge left and were especially influenced by its tragic, introspective, sentimental lyrics. Post-Grunge elaborated further on this theme but also took a step away from Grunge’s heavy distortion, chaos and roughness. The result was a slicker, more polished sound with a clear song structure that turned out to be a commercial success. Post-Grunge became so popular that it stayed in the mainstream much longer than other “Alternative” Rock (though no surprise as its newest genre), against the will of various opponents. These antagonists claimed that Post-Grunge was merely a commercial imitation of something genious and that it should be clearly separated from the original (leading to its name). On the other hand, the fans saw it as the culmination of Rock where finally a perfect balance of roughness versus slickness was found.

### POST-ROCK 1995
ALTERNATIVE
The final chapter in Alternative Rock is the quest for a new sound, a new direction for Rock music in general. Something beyond what was already done, whether it was indie or mainstream. The result of this “Post-Rock” was indeed drastically different; one can easily recognize the spaced out, ambient sound. Post-Rock revolted against both the self-indulgent attitude of alternative rock bands, more concerned with coolness than sound and the greedy commercial bands, composing whatever sells best.

The songs are almost hypnotic, taking the listener on a musical voyage. Of course the synthesizer is a key instrument of Post-Rock, especially to create droning sounds, while drums and (only) the gentle bass guitar form a steady background structure. Post-Rock lacks a classic song structure (verse-chorus) to create surprising music and likes to implement unusual techniques on traditional Rock instruments. There are guitars, drums, and bass but one would hardly recognize them in a familiar Rock way. Post-Rock might have been called Ambient Pop, being very soft with hardly any riffs or noticeable guitars, but that would do the experimental nature of the genre inadequate justice.