
# PUNK ROCK / NEW WAVE
Punk, Post-Punk, and New Wave form a well-documented chapter in the history of Rock, probably because the protagonists show so much evolution in such a short time span. What started as the plainest and purest form of Rock, changed into a conceptual movement embracing the eccentric. In the beginning Punk formed the antipode for what New Wave would later become: mass-appeal, interest from adults, heavy post-production, stardom, eclecticism. The exact same trademarks of Progressive and Stadium Rock from the early seventies which fueled Punk’s revolt in the first place. Rock had lost all connection with the young crowd and a return to the roots was far past due.

Punk mentality goes back beyond the seventies: the concept of short, powerful riffs and brief, energetic songs can be traced to the roots of Power Pop. So called “power chords” not only form the basis for Punk, but even became parodied in a famous quote by Punk magazine Sniffin’ Glue: “Here’s a chord. Here’s another one. That’s three. Now go and form a band!” This quote reveals much about the amateurism of early Punk Rock bands. Punk was almost a statement about ineptitude: anyone could do it. And indeed, some famous artists couldn’t even read notes or barely play guitar. As a living paradigm of protest, Punk knew how to bring music back to the youth: raw, sincere, lo-fi, spontaneous. This is very similar to what happened in Jamaica around the same time: Punk and Reggae were brothers in arms, protesting against authority and returning music to the streets. Punk is Robin Hood in leather and pins. A culture of DIY and sleaziness (drugs, vandalism, squatting, riots, graffiti) blends in with such epitome of enfant terrible, made by and for “punks”: kids who are up to no good. And this is what has made Punk attractive during all these years. Just like Garage Rock and Grunge, Punk is raw: the shredded remains of all eclectic and “intellectual” Rock genres down the meat grinder.

Technically, Punk uses a faster tempo than most Rock genres with sparse instrumentation. Chords are simple but powerful and vocals are usually with a small dynamic range, except when screamed. But Post-Punk and New Wave use more extensive song structure, vocal range and instrumentation. A technical common ground seems therefore far off. What binds these different styles is the power of idea and a strong emphasis on the visual, particularly fashion. The whole era of Punk and Wave is dominated by powerful imagery, shocking personalities and new technology. Both Punk and Wave focus on concept and message. These are not songs about everyday life or personal feelings. Punk and Wave are about the fabric of society in a pessimist, cynical, undermining, or melancholic manner.

The genealogy of Punk and Wave starts with a scattered plethora of Punk subgenres, such as Queercore, Cowpunk, Gypsy Punk, Riot Grrrl, Celtic Punk, Street Punk, Art Punk, Oi!-Punk, Skate Punk, Pop Punk, Psychobilly & Horror Punk, Ska Punk,… Punk becomes almost a one-size-fits-all suffix. The viability of every crossover is put to the test and only the most influential or durable are listed on the map. Retrospectively, Punk branched into two large music streams: Hardcore Punk and Post-Punk/Wave. When New Wave starts to embrace the synthesizer and crosses over to Pop (= Synthpop), it suppresses Post-Punk and pushes it underground (into Gothic/Industrial). Although Synthpop & New Wave might differ greatly from Punk, they use similar concepts of Dadaism and collage as well as expanding these concepts to art forms beyond music, e.g. fashion and performance art. Industrial (and Gothic) inherited Punk/Wave’s intrusion of reality, taking over as popular music’s ultimate insurgent.

## Sub-Genres

### PUB ROCK & PROTO PUNK
1971
PUNK/WAVE
Roots Rock is a vague portmanteau term for Rock genres that steered away from electronic or Pop influences (back to the roots) and which were influenced by early, rural, outside genres such as Folk, Blues and Country. Roots Rock genres include Country/Folk Rock, Southern Rock, as well as Pub Rock. The latter is probably the least familiar one, but significant as the missing link between Hard Rock and Punk Rock. In the US, Pub Rock is seen as no-nonsense Rock for the everyday common man affiliated with A.O.R. In the UK, Pub Rock popped up in bars (pubs) as a more raw, stripped down kind of Rock. It was a short, spontaneous, loose movement, fitting for brawls and malcontent after the end of the flower power age.

Pub Rock and Proto Punk are fairly different genres, but they are both predecessors of Punk. American Proto Punk is much more vaguely defined; in fact it is rather a collection of very influential avant-garde artists who cannot really be placed in another genre and who even sometimes cross over to Classic Metal. Yet these artists had a tremendous influence on Punk and Krautrock, making them among the most important Rock artists of all time.

### PUNK ROCK
1975
PUNK/WAVE
Punk Rock probably was the biggest revolution in Rock history, although the build-up was already tangible in the British bars in the form of Pub Rock. The economic and political situation in Britain during the early seventies made a few young up-to-no-good kids (“punks”) really angry. In the US, they rediscovered the similar forgotten Garage Rock mentality, but the most important contributor of Punk was a strong backlash against “Stadium Rock” of the early seventies. Popular Prog Rock and A.O.R. bands started to reach massive (and more mature) audiences and Rock had become an eclectic spectacle for the elite masses. It was time for a return to the primordial roots of Rock – to give the youth back its stolen and deformed middle finger.

The music was Hard / Garage Rock, but much shorter, faster, energetic, raw and stripped to the base chords which blended in with the rapidly growing out of control Punk subculture. Many early amateur Punk Rock band names were gross and sleazy: Punk liked to indulge in a provocative culture of extreme haircuts (flashy colors, moehawks, sharp peaks), rebellious fashion (disorderly, rough, torn) and disgusting behavior, such as snorting very foul amphetamine sulphate crystals as they were the cheapest drug around. The difference with Industrial was that you could really go wild and dance to it, thus explaining its unfathomable magnetism. A lot of UK Punk was witnessed in the Roxy club, London, whereas US Punk evolved mainly out of the legendary club CBGB’s, New York (which also propelled Post-Punk and New Wave).

### ANARCHO-PUNK, CRUST PUNK, & D-BEAT / DISCORE
1977
PUNK/WAVEHARDCORE
Punk Rock was besides music also a marketing machine, cleverly steered by the movement’s frontman and Sex Pistol’s manager Malcolm Mclaren. In response, a new subgenre answered to the machine: Anarcho-Punk (which lent its name from the Sex Pistol’s infamous single “Anarchy in the UK”). It wasn’t really anarchistic though, mostly reactionary towards Punk Rock. These bands swore by heavy DIY approach, little marketing or publicity, and by their own record production, forming the prelude to Hardcore Punk. A strong community sense, is another trademark of Anarcho-Punk, both by the artists and their fans. But most importantly (as there is not much difference in sound with early Punk Rock) are real political messages, fueled by a distaste for the lyrical shallowness of some of Punk Rock’s most famous bands. Political reaction grew stronger when conservative Margaret Thatcher took office in the UK in 1979, who proved to be a long lasting punching bag for Punk’s offspring genres.

A while after the development of Hardcore Punk (around 1985), Anarcho-Punk gets heavily influenced by Extreme Metal (both Black and Speed). This is clearly discernible in both a more chaotic and faster sound. Two Punk Rock subgenres emerge: Crust (Punk) aka Crustcore and D-Beat or Discore. Crust is a heavy, bass-filled style, much more nihilistic and bleak than Anarcho and the predecessor of Grindcore. D-Beat or Discore is a smaller and more straightforward style named after its repetitive, stuttering drum beats, which was particularly popular in Sweden.

### SKA REVIVAL (2-TONE), SKA PUNK & SKACORE
1978
JAMAICANPUNK/WAVE
During the years of Punk rebellion in the UK, an unexpected ally appeared as Rastafarians (Reggae) started protesting alongside Punks, united by their fight against reform and oppression. Punk and Reggae never merged, though Reggae’s influence is certainly noticeable in many New Wave records. Reactionary street Punk known as Oi!-Punk, was the result of UK skinheads looking for new music to dance to and they found it in Ska (not Reggae). Though Oi! Is sometimes associated with neofascist, racist and nihilistic subcultures, most of the Oi! skinheads picked up the appearance as a satirical protest against the new right-wing UK National Front Party.

The famous British label 2-Tone Records released a new series of British Ska artists, which lead to a large revival and the discovery of Ska in the US and the UK, nearly two decades after the genre was invented. Inspired by Oi! Punk, this second wave of Ska or Ska Revival got mixed up with Punk, but became also influenced by Thrashcore and Skatepunk and by the end of the eighties the formation of Ska-Punk was complete. The second wave of Ska changed Punk songs into uptempo, optimistic tracks with brass instruments, though still politically aware. Ska-Punk is also known as the third wave of Ska, keeping the spirit of Ska alive all the way into the nineties.

### POST-PUNK
1978
PUNK/WAVE
Punk Rock, or more accurately the Punk movement, died around the same time Disco reached her peak. The fall of Punk juxtaposed to the rise of Disco casted a gloomy shadow of both fear and hate among Rock artists. This can be witnessed in the many genres interwoven in the same sociocultural framework as Post-Punk: Early Industrial and Noise genres, Gothic Rock and the No Wave movement. But the immediate aftermath of Punk was Post-Punk: Punk Rock without its edges, but also without some of its amateurism and naivety. In this genre, a dark, arty struggle is noticeable; a difficult coping with what society had become and the impotence of music to change it. One must not forget for example, that 1973 was the year of the first Oil Crisis (which was rapidly followed by the second one in 1979) with long-term international effects on employment and income.

Post-Punk songs became longer, less explosive/aggressive but more complex and challenging. Many Post-Punk songs display a tendency for repetitive elements, to induce a certain trance. Searching for new structures, Post Punk (a subcultural movement on its own) explored less conventional techniques and instruments, while immersing itself deeply in the “Black” music of Funk and Dub. These interests trickled down through Post-Punk into other innovative genres such as Madchester and Trip Hop. Different Post-Punk songs can sound entirely different and a cohesive definition of the genre is lacking. The experimental nature of Post-Punk prevented a true countermovement as there was no unified sound, merely an endless quest. Only New Wave was capable of shedding a light at the end of the tunnel.

### NO WAVE
1978
PUNK/WAVE
Despite the modest popularity and briefness of the movement, No Wave is a well documented and often portrayed music genre. A lot of this attention can be explained by the strong outlines of the genre, the intensity of the music and the hidden but important influence on other genres. No Wave was a cultural avant-garde movement sprawling forth out of the darker, more industrial and abandoned places of New York City and the work of avant-garde bands like Suicide and The Velvet Underground. A number of intellectual artists could no longer bear the depressing events of the seventies, nor the irony of the rising tendency to make New Wave catchier and happier. In the concrete underground jungle of their urban warzone, they created a soundtrack fit for total apocalypse: instrumental, atonal, eclectic, super pissed off and depressing post-Post-Punk-proto-Grunge. Often there were extremely chaotic passages directly inspired from Free Jazz. But No Wave was more than just music: directors, inspired by the French Nouvelle Vague movement and performance artists displayed similar expressions of deconstructivism and nihilism. The minimal lifespan of No Wave (the entire scene lasted from 1978 to 1982) can be explained by an absence of a unified goal. All No Wave artists were connected by their rejection of everything (“NO”), yet failed to become a conglomerated movement. If it weren’t for Brian Eno’s infamous compilation “No New York”, No Wave’s face would probably still be masqueraded in grainy low-key shadows it so dearly embraced.

### NEW WAVE
1980
PUNK/WAVE
As one of the most misused genre names, New Wave often stands for any eighties’ music that sounds somewhere between Rock and Electronic, up to and including Shoegazing, EBM and even New Beat. In the strict sense however, New Wave is only the parallel after Punk reaction, alongside (and quite similar to) Post-Punk, but often with the addition of synthesizers. An important influence from Reggae is also noticeable in the music: a consequence of the collaboration between Punk and Reggae subcultures during their political protest.

The main difference however, is not this growing shift towards electronic Pop, but a clear positive mentality and matching subculture. Herein, the fashion legacy of Punk continues and reaches a new height and hipster look, accompanied by matching graphic design and art. New Wave then, is all about image and looking hip. About embracing the unknown electronic future, instead of reminiscing the glorydays of Punk.

When Ian Curtis (frontman of legendary Post-Punk band Joy Division) committed suicide at the end of 1980, many musicians felt that the whole “Post-Punk Depression” had gone too far and become all too real. From 1981 onwards, a lot of New Wave rapidly changes into Synthpop - which was truly futuristic and progressive – though it still bore the melancholic remnants of dark Post-Punk days.

### HORROR PUNK & PSYCHOBILLY
1981
PUNK/WAVE(rock 'n' roll)
Psychobilly is a weird and unusual fusion genre that never received much attention, although it has a recognizable sound and substantial subculture. In the late seventies, Punk/Garage artists were drawn towards Rockabilly. The mixture of these genres processed a remarkable outcome: creepy Rock ‘n’ Roll with haunting echos, spooky sound effects and rough chainsaw riffs. It is downright crazy music, like the band had lost their brain and became zombified, hence the word Psychobilly. Vocals are also often sung in a stuttering manner, reminiscent of Rockabilly.

Horror Punk or Horror Rock is a genre defined by a large amount of nostalgia for fifties imagery, fashion and themes and especially horror films. Horror Punk shares a great deal of overlapping with Psychobilly as both genres like to indulge in a subculture of B-flicks and cultmovies. Horror Punk and Psychobilly are among the few subgenres of Punk that don’t take themselves seriously (on the contrary), which explains a great deal of their popularity. Shortly after its birth, Psychobilly directly leads to the second wave of Garage Rock (a minor revival movement). Cowpunk or Country Punk (a lesser known Punk subgenre) can be seen as a further evolution of Psychobilly, merging with Alternative Country.

### SYNTHPOP & NEW ROMANTICS
1981
PUNK/WAVEPOP
In the eighties, Synthpop reigns supreme: electronic New Wave that became highly popular due to the combination of a recognizable Pop/Rock song-structure and new and exciting synthesizer sounds. The release of the Yamaha DX7 in 1983 as the penultimate polyphonic synthesizer dramatically increases the production of Synthpop music. Guitars are barely noticeable, if they are present at all or not replaced by “keytars”. The difference between original New Wave and mid-eighties Synthpop is quite large. It’s less aggressive and more melodic, with less Rock and more Pop. It’s sleek and sterile, contagious and danceable, accessible and fun. Another difference is the increased emphasis on fashion, style, glamour and make-up. However, the gradual evolution from Wave to Synthpop ensures that a lot of music falls in between and New Wave becomes an interchangeable term with Synthpop. In this momentum a temporary movement also existed, known as the New Romantics: a hybrid Synthpop/Wave with Disco influences.

Synthpop can be a misguiding term, as the genre is probably the least Pop-like of all Pop genres in terms of mentality. Many Synthpop artists crave experimentalism and conceptual music, building further on the legacy of (Post-)Punk. Synthpop was also one of the few music genres heavily featured on early MTV, alongside Disco Pop, Glam Metal and Golden Age Rap. Difficult arrangements (like Post-Punk), yet simple, futuristic and flashy songs have granted Synthpop an endless appeal, with a far reaching influence and even revivals of revivals.

### SKATE PUNK & POP PUNK
1992
ALTERNATIVEPUNK/WAVE
Both Skate Punk and Pop Punk already existed before the nineties, but were rather obscure subgenres at that time, especially Pop Punk. A second wave or technically a revival of these genres was accelerated by the success of Grunge and the interest in rough guitar music by major record labels that came along with it. Pop Punk and Skate Punk deliver the bursting, loud mouthing energy of Punk, neatly tucked into a flashy jacket of Pop. Where the latter genre consists of independent artists strongly linked to skater or extreme/urban sport subculture, the former is the product of a marketing hype towards (skater) teens, with a strong lack of integrity in their lyrics (like 25-year olds pretending to be still in high school).

Both genres are strongly teen/adolescent oriented, with lyrics that attempt to make sense in their daily lives (Pop Punk bands were purely designed for this like a “bad” boysband). Topics of heartbreak, drugs, friendship, and anti-establishment, often in a rebellious way, are perfect for the reactionary teenager but not too explicit to sell in large volumes. But Skate Punk can go much deeper and become highly political, such as the reactionary “Rock Against Bush” movement.

Both genres qualify as Punk Rock revivals, albeit with Metal and Grunge influences. Pop Punk and Skate Punk are Punk because they are aggressive with mainly short and explosive songs. On the other hand they are also Pop, with their melodic sing along tunes or even anthems.

