# CONTEMPORARY ROCK
For the lack of a proper name, “Contemporary” Rock signifies all new Rock genres in the 21st century. Although this may sound like a meaningless term for the sake of creating a false portmanteau, Contemporary Rock genres share common characteristics, though not technical ones. Generally speaking, two dominant forces control and shape the rise of these genres (and not only in the world of Rock music): recycling and eclecticism. Cut-and-paste techniques form new genres out of old ones. Choice is power and originality/experimentation is overrated. Rock bands focus on the quality of their music and the search of a personal sound, instead of desperately christening a new crusade in the form of genre. The great boom of music genres in the nineties (not only EDM, but also Indie) must undoubtedly have led to genre fatigue and escapism in unclassifiable sound, of which “contra-genres” such as Witch House are the physical proof. Indeed, one might argue that in the 21st century, genre has become alternative or obscure, and fusion has become mainstream.

A technical definition of Contemporary Rock is lacking. The genre uses different influences to create a new concept of Rock music. Synthesizers – once revolutionary and exciting – have become an ordinary Rock instrument like guitar or drums. With influences from Pop, Electronic and even Folk, anything is possible. One could say that Contemporary Rock is defined by being any kind of Rock different from the past. But not even this is true, as Garage Rock and Post-Punk revivals form the exception to that rule.

The power of Contemporary Rock lies in reaching out and building bridges towards other music genres. The age of subcultural niches (us against them) has ceased. The era of genre competition has faded. The ambiguous non-genre “Mash-Up” is a striking example of this; Mash-Up combines all kinds of genres into an eclectic mix, full of surprises and a deliberate mashing of unrelated styles.

Around 1999-2002, Dance becomes more popular than (Alternative) Rock, instilling fear in the hearts of many Rock enthusiast. Yet at the beginning of the millennium (around 2003-2004), Contemporary Rock proved powerful enough to push Dance music back underground. Today the genre remains a powerhouse among popular music, although Contemporary Rock and the arrival of ever more music streaming apps and websites already hint that in the future there will be no more genre monopoly, but a rather equal spread of popularity among all genres, whichever ones that may be.

It is at the very least striking to see that in a society with abundant injustice (financial crisis, climate change, terrorism, racism and migration problems, energy crisis, growing income gap,…), new protest music genres embedded in reactionary subcultures fail to emerge. This may only be explained through the even larger impact on artists of countering forces in contemporary society: globalization, mass-communication, secularisation, techno-materialism, capsulation, and isolation. But Rock must not take the fall for these contemporary behavioural patterns. All super-genres struggle to bring purist styles to the table and to maintain the confined identity they once had. However, if there is one thing Contemporary Rock and consorts such as Mash-Up can teach us, is that we should regard all popular music as one big, indestructible family instead of a list of groups: an intricate network of nodes – a constellation of sound.

## Sub-Genres

### POST-BRITPOP
1999
CONTEMPORARYPOP
Despite the aversion of relevant bands to the label “Post-Britpop” and claims that genre fragmentation within Britpop is pointless, this style is a lot more defined than what you would expect. Britpop’s patriotism got in the way of experimentation and American or Indie influences. Yet a second wave of British artists in the late nineties valued these merits higher than cultural preservation. A clear distinction with their predecessors is the rejection of guitar as the dominant instrument, in favor of a more electronically oriented sound. Another key alteration is the absence of Britpop’s cocky attitude, which got replaced by highly sensitive, fragile lyrics. Post-Britpop is symbolized by a loss of ego. Avant-garde bands like Radiohead and The Verve spearheaded this transition in their later works, but were only a vague sign of things to come. The popularity of Post-Britpop bands quickly outgrew traditional Britpop, making Post-Britpop a sort of Stadium Rock of the nillies. A number of bands returned to the original sound of Britpop, but with contemporary Rock influences such as The Kaiser Chiefs or Bloc Party. With success comes envy and Post-Britpop songs eventually became accused of sounding too uniform, sterile and predictable. Coupled with whiter-than-white sound production and high-pitched male vocals, the way was paved for a countering return to sleazy, lo-fi Garage Rock.

### EMO ROCK
1999
CONTEMPORARY(hardcore)
Around 1996, the earliest crossovers between Emocore and (Alternative) Rock start to take hold. By drifting further away from Hardcore towards Rock, a broader audience could be reached. However, Emo Rock bears little resemblance to its predecessor Emocore: the genre is more a sentimental and emotional form of Indie Rock than an alternative version of Emo. The first wave of Emo bands delivered open-hearted lyrics and compelling power chords in a jacket of heavy distortion riffs.

By 1999 the genre takes a big leap forward, as major record labels realize the potential while opportunistic bands arise, which use the stereotypical image of “Emo” to sell their music to teens. Emo becomes a marketing tool, complete with the fashion of tight jeans, heavy make-up, black & white clothes and purple dye. With far more politically correct lyrics than the first wave of Emo Rock bands, the mainstream appeal of Emo becomes so large that after 2001 a brief but intense emo hype takes hold. By now the term “Emo” has become familiar to the general public and a well established teenage subculture. Unsurprisingly, the genre was heavily frowned upon by a more mature or old skool crowd, due to the lack of early Emo “edginess” and the presence of a rather superficial sentimentality.

### GARAGE ROCK & POST-PUNK REVIVALS / NU RAWK
2003
CONTEMPORARY
The start of the new millennium purveyed an ominous future for Rock music. Alternative Rock was far past its peak and all that remained was Post-Rock and Post-Britpop. Although these genres certainly have their merit, they marked a clear step away from the traditional definition of Rock music: too polished, overproduced and too eclectic. Saturation of music genres became visible in the new millennium, dubbed “the age of eclecticism and recycling”. Whether it was fear for Rock’s future or an aversion for Post-genres, eclecticism was not an option for certain bands. Thus they chose recycling and in an unusual way. Both Garage Rock and Post-Punk were held in high esteem as “pure and rough Rock genres”, leading to Garage and Post-Punk revivals. Although these genres are clearly different, influences from both Shoegazing and Alternative Rock and further cross-influence made their revivals almost impossible to separate. Hence they are conjoined under the name “Nu-Rawk”. The choice of reviving said old genres by new standards worked better than expected and now Nu-Rawk can be seen as the genre that revitalized Rock in the new millennium. Its moment of fame was shortlived however, except a small number of bands with continuous popularity who rose to great fame. As always in music history, shortly after the pendulum swung the other way and Nu-Rawk changed into the eclectic Dance Punk.

### NEW PROG / NU PROG / POST-PROG (ROCK)
2005
CONTEMPORARY
Progressive Rock is a large and durable family of music often divided into several subgenres. One of these for example, is Neo-Prog(ressive Rock). During the eighties, a second wave of artists further experimented with modern technology and often into more symphonic or classical directions. Though over the course of time, Progressive Rock lost that edge over other genres as eclecticism, electronic influences and experimentation in general became more and more basic tools of any Rock band in order to bring something new and exciting to the table. Only a select number of bands could attain the label “Progressive”.

Several decades after Neo-Prog’s creation, New Prog arrives (also labeled Post-Prog or Nu Prog). In a way, New Prog(ressive) is like Prog Metal: a means to classify recent Rock bands that are hard to categorize, but who share a love for original Progressive Rock while staying underground. From the mid nillies onwards, there has been a rise in eclectic bands with a natural talent towards experimentation and high contrast unfrequently used in other genres. This Post-Prog wave differs from the original Prog Rock by an affinity for newer, heavier genres (especially the sharp ones, such as Punk, Hardcore, and Speed Metal). This makes Nu Prog no more eclectic than other Contemporary Rock genres such as Dance-Punk or Chillwave, but it places it at the other side of the spectrum: away from Pop and House. What we have here then is a sort of Post Rock-meets-Metalcore genre; a crisp and clean combination of soft and hard song parts that naturally can cross over to Math Rock.

### INDIETRONICA & CHILLWAVE
2005
CONTEMPORARYPOP
Long after the Madchester explosion (and the fall), Shoegaze was rediscovered as a perfect ingredient for a remarkable melting pot: Synthpop, Electronica, and Shoegazing went pretty well together in a new type of “Ambient New Wave Indie Rock” that could either be called Nu-Gaze, Indietronica or Chillwave depending on matter of perspective or whether the core structure of a certain song is either Rock (New (Shoe)Gaze), Pop/Wave (Chillwave) or Downtempo (Indie (elec)tronica). Therefore two different songs belonging to this genre can very well sound rather different. Unsurprisingly, this is a fairly broad and flexible genre, which can easily tap into a wide spectrum of related genres. Where Nu-Gaze is rather an obscure and rare genre and Indietronica too loosely defined, Chillwave is the genre that comes closest to a certain definition. A definition that easily swallows the other genres as well (illustrated by Chillwave’s alias: Downtempo Pop). After all, this is the age of eclecticism. Chillwave has a very summery mood, full of optimism and dreamy Pop vocals. Eighties retro (further enhanced in a dark way by the successor Synthwave) and lots of reverb on different song parts make it seem like Dream Pop is back from the dead. Another synonym, “Glo-Fi”, also points out parallels between Chillwave and the Dream Pop/Shoegaze era.

A term frequently associated with these latest Rock genres (but obviously applicable to others as well), is “Laptronica”: electronic music performed entirely by simply a laptop. But Laptronica qualifies rather as a derogatory slur from Rock bands and journalists who favor a classic instrumentation (even though Indietronica and exponents often do have one).

### DANCE-PUNK & NU RAVE
2006
CONTEMPORARY(house)
The first notion of the word Dance-Punk appeared around the late seventies as a crossover of Post-Punk into Disco. Though Punk has always been a hyperkinetic genre tied to dancing, “Disco-Punk” reaches out to electronic beats to strengthen this bond.

After Post-Punk, a number of New Wave and Shoegazing bands also experimented with the idea of electronic pulsating rhythms, more similar to EDM than Synthpop (New Order’s avant-garde “Blue Monday” for example). Especially in Manchester, UK, cross-pollination was at an all-time high: Acid House was welcomed by the British with open arms, leading to an unusual subgenre called Madchester, the bridging between Alternative Rock and Acid House.

Alternative Dance or Indie Dance (or “Punkfunk”) is the combination of any Alternative or Punk/Wave genre with Dance music, including many Madchester songs and early Dance-Punk. As such, the genre is poorly defined and more a collection of unrelated songs dispersed as dying stars in the musical universe. However, the renewed interest in pre-Indie Rock music by Nu-Rawk bands also shifted the ground where Indie Dance was buried, resulting in what is now understood as “Dance-Punk”: modern Punk/Wave meets House. The music is so infectious that even the middle aged middle class white man starts to dance.

And finally, there is the short-lived New (Nu) Rave movement, which blends Dance-Punk with Indie Rock. Fast, danceable Rock music created by artists with only their laptop: DIY entrepreneurship like free Tekno and Rave and a grasp of their old skool euphoria in a Rock ensemble. Nu Rave is Madchester in the age of social media and hipsterism.

### INDIE FOLK & FREAKFOLK / NEW WEIRD AMERICA
2008
CONTEMPORARYPOP
Although this genre is obviously a form of Folk music, a large and welcoming familiarity within Rock/Pop circles combined with a heavy influence from popular music justifies its presence on the map. In fact, Freakfolk is so eclectic that it cannot belong to only one super-genre and is sometimes called Free Folk. As a subgenre of Indie Folk (which is any combination of Alternative/Contemporary Rock and Folk) it started off rather slowly around 2003. Psychedelic Folk Rock Bands such as The Incredible String Band, Holy Modal Rounders and Comus inspired diverse artists into a new, hypnotic and druggy kind of Folk. Modal based structure (like Modal Jazz) and multi-layering of freaky sounds with the most unusual instruments are the primary contributors to its experimental nature. It’s hard to put a common denominator on Freakfolk’s sound, which is exactly why it’s called that way or by its synonym: New Weird America.

Indie Folk's history can be traced back to the nineties, when Alternative Rock bands revive Folk once more. But it wasn’t until the arrival of certain promiscuous Electropop singles and later Moombahton and derivatives that both Indie Folk and Freakfolk really build up momentum. This youth-oriented, twerk-friendly, hyperactive and formulaic music pushed Freakfolk and Indie Folk even more in the opposite direction, and created an incentive for more mature, honorable and unpredictable music. The latest forms of Indie Folk (which have become highly popular, like e.g. Mumford & Sons) are also known as Nu-Folk.
